# Validator

This directory contains the Python-based validator for the governance repository.
This README describes the checks performed by the validator, as well as other checks.

## Validator Checks

- The key orderings in a TOML file must match the the ordering of `properties` in the
  corresponding schema file.

### Members

- The `github-username` field for a member must be a valid GitHub username.

- The `andrew-id` field for a member

  - must match the username of a user in Keycloak.

  - must match the email of a user in Slack.

### Teams

- The `slug` field for teams must match the filename.

- All leads in a team must also be listed as members.

- All team members must exist in the `members/` directory.

- GitHub repositories must exist and be unique in a list.

## Bash Script Checks

- Pull requests adding a new member must be submitted by the member themselves.
  This self-nomination approach promotes ownership, helps maintain the integrity
  of our member list, and encourages active participation with our governance
  process and the organization. PRs in violation will be automatically rejected.

- When adding a new team, the team members must have already been added in
  previous PRs due to the earlier requirement on adding members.
  For similar reasons, you must be a lead of any team you create.

- Since you may only add one member and join only one team per PR,
  any PR that changes more than one file in the `members/` or `teams/`
  directories is automatically rejected.

## Check EditorConfig Compliance

We use [EditorConfig](https://editorconfig.org/) to ensure consistent coding styles.
The VSCode extension [editorconfig.editorconfig](
  https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=editorconfig.editorconfig
) will format files automatically when saving.
You can also run the check locally by installing [editorconfig-checker](
  https://github.com/editorconfig-checker/editorconfig-checker?tab=readme-ov-file#installation
) and running `editorconfig-checker`.

## Validate TOML Files

We use [Taplo](https://taplo.tamasfe.dev/) to validate the TOML files against
the schemas defined in the `__meta/schemas/` directory. The VSCode extension
[tamasfe.even-better-toml](
  https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=tamasfeeven-better-toml
) will show red squiggles in the editor for errors. You can also run the check
locally by installing [taplo-cli](https://taplo.tamasfe.dev/cli/introduction.html)
and running `taplo fmt --check` and `taplo check`.

## Validate CODEOWNERS

We use the [mszostok/codeowners-validator](https://github.com/mszostok/codeowners-validator)
tool to validate the autogenerated `CODEOWNERS` file. This check requires the
`SYNC_GITHUB_TOKEN` secret, which is unavailable for PRs from forks.
As a result, this check is skipped for PRs from forks.
